Okay. Hi, Jo Jo.
Hey, how are you?
Very well, thank you.
Good.
I think we're just waiting for Mike.
Can we start with two, no?
Yeah. Yeah. With quorum's two.
Okay. We might just keep going, Jo, because otherwise we're going to run out of
time and the quorum's two.
Thank you. Ka pai. Okay.
Just need to turn his camera on, so
yeah.
Hi, Nick. Welcome to the-
Hello
... welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
Hey look, I'm just conscious that we've only got five minutes, so you can
take your submission as read, but give us an introduction and then
please, ideally leave a couple of minutes for questions. That'd be great.
Yeah, sure. No problem.
Look forward to it
So, thank you for reading my submission.
As I said there, I do oppose the bill.
My name is Nick Hoyle,
and I would say I am somewhat fairly
connected within the fishing space, fishing industry. I run a podcast.
We've got about, oh, I don't know, 10,000 followers, something like that.
And I'm talking to a lot of fishermen a lot of the
time, and
there is genuine concern for the fishery right now.
Whether it's
up and down the country, I speak to people from all the way in the far, far north,
right the way down to East Cape and beyond, and there is
genuine concern, and concerns that the bill that
has been put forward doesn't address the real issues with the fishery right
now and only serves to feed more into
the challenges that have been caused through the overfishing and
the commercial fishing use of that fishery.
So,
I feel like this
resource is a public resource and it should be treated as such,
not as just a money basket to feed foreigners.
So that's kind of my statement on it. You've read my formal submission.
Yeah.
Excellent. Jo, do you have a question?
Yeah. Jo, just what do you mean by not just a money basket to feed
foreigners? Can you elaborate on that, please?
Well, so
yeah, absolutely. So,
if you look at the fish that is caught commercially,
more than 90% of it is sent offshore.
Why are we feeding people overseas when people that want to
buy fish here in the supermarkets are paying crazy prices
per kilo for fish that
is
sent offshore and is sold for cents on the dollar oftentimes just for the
volumes that they're selling. I mean, the kahawai that's caught and sent to
Australia for crab bait. Come on.
It's
embarrassing.
I've seen them out there. I've been out here in the gulf and you see these purse
seine vessels catching all the bait that gets sold offshore to
nations and it's like, man, no wonder our game fishery is suffering.
I talk to game fishermen, and the marlin just aren't coming because there's nothing
for them to eat. So they're staying away, and that's if they even make it through
the EEZ. But that's another whole conversation.
The last three seasons on the east coast, the game fishing has been
decimated. And you see these spotter planes come across,
and then within an hour or so, there's these
purse seiners taking the bait, and the fish are gone.
And there's more money in sport fishing and recreational
boats than there is in sending it off for cents on the dollar overseas.
It's crazy.
Thank you.
Thank you. So you talked about your-- congratulations on your podcast with 10,000
followers. So what are the general sentiments that you're getting back from them,
much along the same lines as your submission?
I recently had a ex-fisheries observer on as a guest, and it just blows my
mind the amount of waste, the amount of stuff.
But people want this content. There's
a
real thirst for understanding fishing and the fishery and
I
would say I do put a lot of focus on
recreational side of things, not the commercial sector.
But when I talk to people, they are seeing that the
fishery's not in the state that it was and
we're constantly told by the minister that, "Oh, we've got a world-class leading
quota management system." Then why are we closing scallop beds, and why are we
closing crayfish areas, and why are we having
things, like I say, like a game fishery that's depleted if we're
world-leading in our management? That's not world-leading. It's misleading.
Thank you very much. That's a really good point actually, Nick. Thank you.
And thanks very much for taking the time to talk to us today.
Yeah, appreciate it. Thank you.
Cheers. Bye.
Okay, next up we have Craig
Outen. Outen? Outen.
It's Louisa George.
Oh.
Okay. Louisa George, is it?
Kia ora. That's right, Louisa.
Oh, got you. Hi, Louisa.
Hi.
I'm sorry. So we've got Jo here too, and we've just got five minutes, so it's
not very long, but if you could make your remarks pretty brief so we've got time to
ask a couple of questions, that would be awesome.
Fire away
Sure. Thanks for the opportunity to speak today.
I'm speaking as a recreational fisherwoman.
I don't have a podcast, but that was really cool to hear Nick speak.
I've got a family with a deep lifelong connection to the ocean here in
Aotearoa. I'm based here in Raglan, Whangaroa.
Fishing for us and getting out on the ocean is such a major part
of how we spend time together, how I feed my family, connect with the
environment. My 16-year-old son, he's a mad keen fisherman.
Him and his mates have got boats. They go out fishing, and to see that sense of
pride when he provides for his family is just really awesome.
I am concerned, which is why I normally wouldn't put my hand up to speak at the
select committee. I would do a submission.
But I am keen to get my voice out there to say, it's harder to
catch fish in places where it used to be reliable.
No, we're not the only ones either.
Some of the members of Parliament even referenced that they are finding it hard to
catch a fish during the first reading of the Fishery Amendment bill,
which I perked up my ears. And so from where I stand, the current
system isn't really delivering that abundance that's associated with
Aotearoa and the stories from our older generations.
So
when we see that fish abundance declining in lots of places, it feels
like the Fisheries Amendment bill is looking to weaken some of the protections
or lower the standard of precaution in fisheries management.
I also picked up on something that Shane Jones, Honorable Shane
Jones said at the first reading as well
about not going back to relitigate and look over past decisions, and I
think good management should not be afraid to reflect,
reassess, and adjust when outcomes aren't meeting
expectations. Adaptive management is not a weakness.
It's responsible stewardship. So when I look at this bill,
I'm worried that instead of strengthening the system and improving
sustainability and improving things for the future, it actually is
risking weakening what we've got further.
So,
while we've seen a signal back down around removing that
minimum fish size protections,
that those changes were proposed at all has deeply concerned a
lot of the recreational fisher people, including me, around the direction of the
legislation.
Fish are not an economic asset. They're a public resource that belongs
to all New Zealanders, including our future generations.
So we need to make sure that we've got strong public
accountability and public trust.
So reduced transparency around fisheries monitoring and decision making
concerns me.
Changes that appear to place greater emphasis on economic outcomes
over long-term sustainability, that concerns me.
Shortened time frames for the public to challenge decisions
and
changes that could further disadvantage recreational fisher people like me,
who already feel like we're not really seeing the-- we've got the
short end of the stick a little bit.
So yeah, that's a quick summary. I'm not against change,
but I am against change that moves us further away from healthy, abundant
fisheries. And I'd like us to be aiming for more fish
in the water, not fewer. More confidence in the system and the governance,
not less. And for stronger protections.
Yeah.
Oh, thank you very much, Louisa. We've reached time, but thank you, and great to
hear the story about your son being a keen fisherman, too. Well done to him.
Thank you. Appreciate the time.
Awesome. Thank you.
Ka kite anō.
Ka kite.
I've
got Rowan. I think
Susan's busy at the minute, but-
No, I'm here. Sorry
... we've got five minutes to hear your submission. There she goes. All right.
Okay. Thank you. My name is Rowan Bullock.
I live in Katikati,
Western Bay of Plenty. Keen recreational fisherman.
Have been since I was a young lad and also
have had the opportunity to be in countries such as Romania and
South Korea, where I have witnessed the effects of
overfishing and exploitation, if you like, of their
natural fisheries to the point where basically everything's banned.
But in terms of the amendments and the submission, thank you for letting us have
this opportunity. It's a good reflection of our democracy.
But in my view, these amendments actually seek to facilitate an
unsustainable practice, which is bottom trawling.
We're writing legislation around the fact that they can't discriminate the
catch. We can't disseminate
what we're catching, so we just make a catchall
process, which I think is counter to good management of the
fishery.
We have a syndrome
in the Firth of Thames called milky flesh
in snapper, and the department says it's because of
starvation. Now, you don't have to take a very deep
think to think, "Well, why is it the snapper's starving in a so-called
Coastline of Plenty?" Well, it's because we're ripping the
environment out of the sea floor with bottom trawling.
But
as opposed to Mycoplasma bovis, which we spent over
a billion dollars eradicating, nobody seems to spend any money trying to find what
this problem is in snapper, because I don't think they want to know the answer.
So I think, again, the proposals seek to reduce the accountability, not to
enhance it.Now we grow kiwifruit here, and we're
subject to global gap requirements, which basically looks at
all of the facets of our business, from fruit
quality to management to governance,
and we're accountable. If we don't pass
those thresholds, Zespri won't take our fruit, and we're happy with that.
And I'm sure other primary producers are also subject to similar
scrutiny through places such as Fonterra.
So I guess the point is, we want to see our fishery
managed
for generations well past ours, not just what's going to
turn a dollar in the short term.
Bottom trawling,
really, we need to take a look at ourselves as a country.
Nobody else apparently does it. And the act does
say that in 13F,
that the minister should be taking into account the environment when approving
these systems for fishing.
And we are destroying the environment, not enhancing it.
So,
we can change from fishing types. I don't oppose commercial fishing at
all, but target species through
things like longlining rather than just netting.
And I think we really need to get serious about managing it.
As earlier speakers have said, there's a lot of money in
recreational fishing, tourism, and whatever that we
seem to be happy to destroy. It's just very
sad.
Thank you very much, Ron. Jo, do you have a question?
No, but thank you for your submission, Ron.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. That was awesome.
Thanks for taking time to talk to us today.
Cheers. Bye.
Bye.
Mark Modra.
He'll
be marking you in now as well.
Okay, thanks.
Hi, Mark.
Yes.
I'm Sue Redmayne. You're here with Jo Luxton as well.
We realize we've
only got a short amount of time, so if you want to just make a statement,
and then leave some time for some questions, that'd be fantastic.
Thank you very much. Yes, good afternoon, and thanks for taking the time to
consider my submission.
I am a long time listener, but first time caller.
Probably prompted by the
passion that I can see others have for this
matter.
Look, I'm a scientist, postgraduate qualified with over 20 years'
experience practicing in science, and while not in fisheries,
I understand science enough to sort of see the potential for
manipulation of scientific data to meet industry objectives.
I'm strongly opposed to the bill as it stands.
And that view's shared by many of the people I talk to, friends, family,
colleagues.
I've been a keen recreational fisher for longer than I can remember.
And yeah, I just want to present to you a few empirical
examples of the importance of recreational fishing.
The fishery, the importance of it to others outside of the industry.
My 85-year-old father
loves to retell the same stories, and one of those
is when he first borrowed some scuba gear when it was a new thing.
I'm not sure how long ago that was, but safe to say
many, many years. And he went underwater and he describes the
environment that he saw as being like Kelly Tarlton's.
Safe to assume that that means,
due to the abundance and types of fish, rather than them
being in an enclosure or cage. And
look outside of probably Goat Island.
I've never experienced that.
And then, my two young children this summer,
took them out. They caught their first fish
and it was so exciting for them, and it was super exciting for me
to see that. And we need that opportunity to be
available for future generations, without an
end date for that to sort of happen.
It's been
stated by the few people that I've seen speaking just
before me that
the current system, the fact that we're
closing fisheries off demonstrates its failings, right?
It's not working.
And fisheries are closed pretty late and often
probably won't recover, certainly not to the state that they were before.
And it certainly appears that the proposed changes are going
to make it even worse.
They're not changes being put in place to increase environmental
safeguards. They're eroding the safeguards
that are already there. Yet that empirical
evidence suggests that we need to go the other way,
so that we can have a sustainable fishery and sustainable meaning,
for the long term, not sustaining the pockets of a
few for the short term.
Oh, thank you. I've got a question, if that's okay.
You mentioned the manipulation of scientific data to meet industry
objectives, and I know one of my colleagues on the committee, Rachel Boyack, this
morning talked about her concern about the lack of available data.
I just wondered if you could expand on that, on your concern about the manipulation
of the data.
Look, so yes, there is a lack of data and in some cases,
decisions are being made that should be much more cautious
because of that lack of data rather than the other way around.
But where we have data, often it's actually collected by
industryIt's not all independently
collected information. So that's why I make that comment,
and I'm not saying that it has been manipulated.
I'm merely pointing out that I understand how it
can be, and therefore the
dangers of relying on scientific information
that is not objective.
Thank you very much. Do you have a question, Jo?
Okay. Thank you very much for your time, Mark. We really appreciate it.
Thanks, both.
And you did well for-
All the best
... yeah, and great being a first-time submitter.
You're not alone, I can assure you.
I bet. Thank you.
Okay.
Tim.
Hi,
Tim. I'm Suz. You've also got Jo Luxton here.
You're spot on, good afternoon.
You've got five minutes, which goes pretty quickly, so if you want to leave
some time for a couple of questions-
Ha ha
... that'd be amazing.
100%, and look, yeah, I'm going to leave plenty of time for questions because I'm
guessing you have read my submission.
And look, there's probably, I guess, only three sort of key, I guess, points that I
just want to sort of, I guess, sort of stress and I call them sort of more the
macro level points that I want to make.
And that is simply that this bill as it stands,
the only economic benefit is to commercial fishing, but it's not actually
long-term sustainable in that regard alone.
And I really want to, I guess, sort of zoom in onto the
economic benefits of recreational fishing and what then translates into a
significant spend in local economies.
And look, if we're trying to get social license from our communities for
a sustainable fishery long term, we actually have to have, I
guess, an overarching economic structure and
construct which actually allows great
community involvement, which is obviously happens through recreational fishing
rather than commercial. And it's not about cutting commercial out, but you have to
have a fisheries environment that allows both to thrive.
And look, I guess,
for someone that's had the privilege of living in paradise in Bream Bay in
Northland for all of my life, I can just testify
to when I was a kid and up into my early 20s,
Bream Bay, we had big, big workups of kahawai,
kingfish, birds flocking everywhere, year
after year after year. We don't see those anymore, and that is a
direct result of intensive commercial fishing and particularly purse
seining, which is just simply scooping the bay clean.
So my plea really is to say, look, do please consider the
long-term economic benefit of a thriving
recreational fishery, which can only happen if
commercial is allocated its fair share and nothing more.
That's the, I guess, the bulk of my submission.
Very happy to take some questions and expand on any of that for you.
Jo, you got anything?
Yeah, I do have a question. I just wanted to ask you about your
line that says you reject any attempt to limit public access to camera footage
through the Official Information Act.
And we've had a few conversations about this, and one of the things that
was raised was that
when you have other events, say for example, a crime
that's on the street and CCTV footage captures it or
in a store where someone, maybe a staff member, has
taken something illegally, that footage is not available to the
public. And I wondered why
you
would like the public to have continued access to this type of
footage, because does it not then
perhaps put workers in a compromised
situation when they might be seen publicly and
people can identify them in that way?
Do you not think that there's some sort of privacy for workers needed here?
Just a-
Yep. Look, great question. And I guess there's two parts to that answer or two part
answer to that. The first part is, look, in releasing the
footage, because obviously it's not real-time footage, so the technology is
absolutely there to number one, screen and mask
individuals. So the footage is more about, I guess, the
access to what are the practices that are going on.
And so I think that's the first part is that you can absolutely bake
privacy
sort of requirements and, to your point, staff
safety into that. But I think on the other end of the scale,
when I look at what
floats around on social media every single day of
people's recording of, should we say, unsavory events in
local streets and pubs and everything else like that.
There's, I guess, a bigger question mark anyway around what constitutes privacy in
this day and age through the private filming and releasing via
social media of things that are happening on a day-to-day basis.
Thank you.
Thank you. You talked about this trying to get a social license from
our communities, which resonated with me and I just wondered, what do
you think needs to be done in terms of commercial fisheries to get
that social license?
Sure. Well, I think the first thing is that obviously the parts that I'm opposed to
in the bill is what is essentially almost like a wholesale
license to the commercial sector to take what they like, and not be
punished for
reckless and unnecessary wastage of
resource
through
small size catch and bycatch. And the second part
of it is that there needs to be a mechanism in place which
recognizes and quantifies the economic benefit of
recreational fishing alongside commercial.
We've got plenty of data of what the economic benefit of commercial fishing is,
but we have zero data of what the actual economic benefit of
recreational fishing truly is.
Oh, thank you. Well, Matt Watson put a number on it this morning, I think, in his
submission. He said it was worth about 1.6 billion to the
GDP. Yeah. But you're right.
I'll happily ask my good mate Brad Olsen that one. I'm sure he'll find a number.
Thank you very much, Tim. We appreciate your time.
Wonderful. Thanks so much for having me.
Cheers. Bye.
Right.
Toshi Rapana.
Is the mic on?
He is. So it's video on.
Oh. Turned it off.
Hello, can you hear me?
Yes. Kia ora, Toshi.
Kia ora.
We can't see you, but we can hear you.
Oh. Oh, okay.
Oh,
I'm not sure why that's happening, but it's okay.
Okay, that's fine.
Okay. We've just got five minutes, so if you could keep your introductory
remarks relatively brief, if you want to leave some time for questions, that would
be fantastic.
Yeah, sure.
The floor is yours.
So kia ora, my name is Toshi Rapana.
I'm a recreational fisher and free diver from Whakatane.
Mm-hmm.
And I'm speaking today in opposition
to aspects of the Fisheries Amendment Bill.
I strongly support monitoring, accountability, and enforcement
within our fisheries system. Better data collection and monitoring
tools can help improve transparency and ensure
rules are being followed properly.
However, I do not support any proposal that weakens protections for our
fisheries,
in particular around undersized catch and sustainability.
As someone who spends time in the water gathering kaimoana for my family,
I have seen the decline in accessible seafood stocks.
Since returning to Whakatane after living in Wellington for many
years, I have not found a single legal sized pāua in
the areas I can safely and legally access, including
areas along the coast such as Te Kaha and Omaio.
This concerns me greatly because it reflects the wider pressure our
marine ecosystems are under. I am also deeply
concerned about the spread of kina barrens throughout Whakatane and down the
east coast. In my view, this is closely linked to
depleted crayfish populations. Crayfish
play an important role in controlling our kina numbers, and
when crayfish decline, the kinas overgraze the
reefs and they destroy the vegetation, which many
species rely on. This bill should be focused not only on managing
extraction, but also on restoring and protecting marine
ecosystems in the future.
I do not support allowing commercial operators to retain undersized fish.
Fish need the opportunity to grow and reproduce to maintain
healthy stocks. Recreational fishers are required to follow
strict size limits, and commercial operators should be
held to at least the same standard.
I would also like to see stronger accountability measures included in the
fisheries management.
If commercial operators catch undersized fish or exceed their
quota, there should be meaningful consequences.
I believe an undersized catch should still count towards their quota,
even if it's returned alongside penalties for quota breaches.
This would encourage better fishing practices and reduce unnecessary
environmental harm. I also have concerns about destructive
fishing practices such as bottom trawling, which damages not only
fish stocks, but our entire marine ecosystems and
seabed habitats. More sustainable methods need to be
prioritized moving forward. Finally, I would like to see greater
transparency from both the government and commercial operators about how
fisheries are being managed and what is being done to restore marine
ecosystems. I also support reinvesting a portion of
commercial fishing profits into restoration initiatives
such as kina removal and crayfish recovery.
Our moana is our taonga, and the decisions made through
this bill will impact what is left for our tamariki and our mokopuna
in the future. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Toshi. That was very comprehensive.
Jo, do you have a question?
Okay, Jo's on mute, but that's okay. Thank you very much for your time.
I was just quickly going to talk to the-- I understand that the
supporters of the bill would argue
that the idea behind making commercial fishers keep the
undersized fish is that 99% of them die anyway,
as opposed to recreational fishers that are fishing with a hook and line and from
shallow water, where the survivability is much better of those that are returned to
the sea. And that they do actually have to count them against their quota.
So they would argue that it might make them change their
behavior if it's going to reduce their profit margin.
If, say, 20% of their catch is undersized and they're having to
just rely on the money they make from 80%.
So how would you argue that?
To be honest, I feel like commercial operators need to come up with their own
solutions because I feel as though they've been given too much leeway,
in terms of their catch and their quotas.
And in terms of how this might affect their profits, I guess that's up to them to
determine and to decide on.
Okay. Thank you very much for your time, Toshi. Much appreciated.
Thank you.
Okay.
Derek Paul
Kia ora.
Kia ora, Derek.
Tēnā koutou katoa. Ko Derek Paul toku ingoa.
I wish to submit on the Fisheries Amendment Bill. Thank you for this opportunity.
I've been a recreational fisher since I was three years old, and I've been involved
in fisheries management since 2005.
Sat as a board member and a VP on the Recreational Fishing Council and the New
Zealand Angling and Casting Association.
I've been a warranted fisheries officer with MPI, and I've sat on recreational
forums for MPI, and I sat on ministerial advisories representing the public
to healthy and abundant fisheries.
In 2011, I founded a fishing magazine that ran for seven years before we sold it.
It was provided to the public for free to help engage and enable better
fishing experiences for the people.
I wrote my first fishery submission in 2007 on the then
proposed Marine Protected Areas legislation, which is still not closed.
There've been many more, and there have been many that have been completely ignored
by those who make decisions.
I've submitted to ministers from Jim Anderton, Phil Heatley, David
Clark,
Nathan Guy, Stuart Nash, Rachel Brooking, and now Shane Jones.
Everything I do in the realm of fisheries has been to elevate the recreational
fisher's experience and to push the ministry to make changes that increases the
abundance of all fish species. I've been around
fish for some time, and quite frankly, I've probably had more experience in this
space than any of the MPs sitting on the panel
today. So when I submit this bill, I'm not a bot, I'm not just a
noisy voice, I'm not a Yamaha, Kawasaki, blah blah, who's
catastrophizing, as the minister likes to label us,
but I'm pointing out the significant concerns of Kiwis who fish
for food and fun.
I strongly oppose the Fisheries Amendment Bill.
Specifically, I oppose the changes that reduce the public's access to camera
footage collected on commercial vessels for the purpose of compliance in any form,
and the heavy-handed penalties that the bill proposes should this be breached.
The minister's defense that the fisheries
industry operates in the most privacy invasive environment
is in itself catastrophizing. There's little, if any, identifying information
on these cameras. The workers are not being filmed in their galley or bedrooms, et
cetera.
I think the minister might like to reconsider his hyperbolic statements that
obscure the truth.
The taking of small fish is wrong, and we should be doing everything we can to
minimize this. While I personally believe that all fish should be landed
regardless of size,
with strictly enforced deemed values or similar on fish landed
below a specific size,
under no circumstances should fish be returned to the sea unless specifically
allowed for, such as we have for sharks, billfish, and strong,
live kingfish.
Let's not beat around the bush. It's wasteful and a tax on the marine environment.
The bill muddies the water around this issue and allows fishers to dump or keep
small fish. Simply, all fish must be landed, and it's up to the minister
to set disincentives for small fish being landed, not just keep
giving free rein to fishers or their quota holders that tell them to, to
decide when to keep or dump. The bill includes provisions
to carry over quota and lock TACC and other
anti-abundance issues. These appear to only serve the commercial industry and do
not meet the requirements of the Fisheries Act to maintain sustainable
fisheries. There have been submissions by others,
and there will be by others, who've delved into the science around these
activities, and I cede to their greater knowledge.
The practice of setting long, that's over one year, TACCAs
and carrying over quota breaches the precautionary principle and
unnecessarily risks the health of fish stocks.
There's nothing in this legislation that will specifically drive
improved practice. Nothing that meets the minister's obligation under the Fisheries
Act, where the opening line states that the purpose of the act is to provide for
the utilization of fisheries while ensuring
sustainability.
It is clear that this bill will further undermine
sustainability. Aotearoa has the opportunity to actually be
what the commercial sector repeatedly tells us we are, a world leading
fishery. This bill will not deliver that.
I've never seen a piece of legislation in the fishery space that is this
anti-public and likely to cause meaningful long-term harm to the environment.
My request is that the bill be withdrawn, and before a
replacement is drafted in any way, that the minister instructs his ministry
to consult with the public meaningfully.
If you want to improve returns for our country,
the answer is not to allow practices that have demonstrably negative impacts
on our stocks.
The answer is a modern, abundant, and ecosystem-focused practice that sees the
public, tangata whenua, and commercial fishers benefit from more fish in the water,
lower cost to access, and a better international reputation that drives
real value, not just $1.90 a kilo export of whole
frozen kahawai to Namibia and 5 cent a kilo mackerel
to Wallis and Futuna.
Thank you so much, Derek. We've actually reached time, but thank you
very much for taking the time to talk to us today.
Thanks.
Dale Breakaway. This is really
annoying.
Hello.
Kia ora, Dale. Hi.
You've got five minutes, which seems to go pretty quickly, and you can take your
submission as read, but if you want to leave some time for questions, that'd be
great.
Fantastic.
The floor is yours.
I'm happy to give a minute of mine to Derek because that was a fantastic
submission, and I would like to strongly
echo what he has said
as my first point. But thank you for the time to speak.
I'm a very proud New Zealander. I'm a spear fisherman and a free diver, and I've
spent a significant amount of time in the water in New Zealand and overseas.
AndMy reason for wanting to talk on this issue is
because I've seen these ecosystems being destroyed in real time.
As Toshi noted a couple of talks ago, the spread of kina
barrens is clear if you're one of these people who's
in the water regularly, and I've noted that in Abel Tasman
over my couple of decades diving there, where there used to be a thriving
ecosystem and now it is effectively a desert.
We know why this happens. It's a symptom of overfishing,
as she quickly stated, and it's
just one example of what is truly happening
in our marine environment and the impact we're having.
It's effectively a broken ecosystem, and it's not for the betterment
of ourselves as recreational
fishermen,
nor for the commercial industry,
nor for anyone in New Zealand.
So we know what happens from overfishing.
History's shown us that the commercial industry needs strong controls
on traffi, et cetera,
and
with a good ecosystem, with a healthy ecosystem,
comes
the maximum sustainable catch and the maximum
value for New Zealand as a whole. So
these things are very well aligned.
We have a healthy ecosystem, we have a good fishery.
So I have no issue with commercial fishing.
As Derek mentioned,
people are quick to label opponents of this bill as anti
commercial fishing, and that's simply not true.
But there's better ways to do this, and like I said,
a healthy ecosystem actually gets us the best outcome.
The omission of anything about bottom trawling in this bill is a massive red flag,
and if we really wanted to do what's best for the environment, and
like I say, what's best for actually making a good,
strong, valuable fisheries industry, then we would be
addressing that.
We cannot have a healthy fishery if we are bulldozing the sea floor.
It's incredibly destructive, and yet this bill ignores it entirely.
I'm also deeply concerned by the paid for nature of this piece of
legislation. The relationship between New Zealand First,
the minister,
and various industry parties here is incredibly clear.
Spoken about publicly at length, and it's clear that this piece
of legislation is not for New Zealand, it is for industry.
It's effectively bought and paid for,
and that is simply not how our government should function.
It's not democratic,
and
I'm frankly deeply concerned about that aspect.
The $50,000
fine, which we know is a gag, really, and the other anti-democratic
aspects of removing footage from OIA requests
and
keeping the minister
from being
able to be scrutinized by the public with this very short two-week period is just
further evidence on that. So sorry, I know we're at time. I'll wrap up.
There's various other parts of the government, as you well know, have sounded their
own concerns about this.
The
whole thing is
a bad faith exercise. We do need to make fisheries change.
There are aspects here that should be considered and taken into another bill, but
this bill must be strongly rejected.
The anti-democratic aspects must be strongly rejected, and we
should come into the future with something that
addresses these massive issues, the decline we've already seen,
keeps this resource for all New Zealanders, and keeps us in the
process and keeps everyone, including the industry, accountable.
Thank you very much.
Thank you so much, Daryl. Just very quickly before you go, you talked about there's
some aspects of the bill that you'd like to see introduced in another piece of
legislation. What were those? Which were the bits that you liked?
Well, you asked two questions ago
about this removal of size limits, and
as you noted, many of these fish, smaller fish caught
are dead.
Obviously, we need to address the fishing methods, if it's bottom
trawling, things like that, we need to do things that are more selective.
But where we are catching things that are
outside of the intended size range, then yes, throwing them
back is a zero value add for almost anyone.
So,
and there's certainly cases where catching small fish is actually the best way to
remove fish from an ecosystem, right?
This is a big problem with recreational fishermen who love smashing the
that they
can find. That fish is super valuable as a breeding individual.
So there's somewhere in there where the optimum is,
and there's definitely some rebalancing we can do there.
But again, it has to come out of the quota, and there has to be strong protections
for a breeding population, and that's what isn't currently in there.
Awesome. Thank you so much, Daryl. We really appreciate your time.
No, thank you. Goodbye.
Okay, bye.
So we've
now got a three-minute breather, have we?
Yeah, we'll call Panama.
Maybe give them a couple of minutes, and I'm just going to sort my bits of paper
out because I seem to have some out of order.
You've got two minutes, Jojo.
Okay.
This one doesn't
even
read what the
person...
I'll see if I can find it in the system and work out who it is for you.
Please, what's this?
Hold on one second.
Oh, that's all right.
See if I can-
Thank you
...
yeah.
We've got next, we have Taimana Takimoana. Is that right?
Yes. Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, there's another one here that I
don't know as
well.
Okay, we ready to go?
Is Jo there? Oh, yeah.
Like
when the radio station rings and someone won a competition, and they don't answer.
And you think, "Go on, just answer the phone."
Still trying to get back after.
Is the next one there? Oh, okay, yeah. We're good.
Yeah, because that doesn't sound very positive.
Okay, so now we've got Mirin Pierce.
Did you catch that, Jo?
Yeah.
Mike, we can't see or hear you, but apparently you're there. So hi.
Oh, Mirin, hi.
Howdy, team. I think I've pressed the right buttons.
You have indeed. So the five minutes goes very quickly, and you can take your
submission as read, so if you want to leave some time for questions, that would be
fantastic. Fire away.
Thank you. Thanks for the opportunity to speak, and also for extending the
time for submissions and the extra slot for folks like me to have a chance.
I was brought up around fishing, bay of plenty.
Grandparents and father and friends out on the boat, off the beach.
I dive. I take people out. I love eating fish. I love buying fish.
But in the current form, I'm really worried about this bill, and I can see that we
can do a lot better.
It kind of casts me back to the early '80s where we had peer trawling going
along the coasts very close to shore, and we know the damage it was
doing to inshore fishing at that time.
I feel like we're kind of going back to those unknown days and allowing
fishing happening in the remote areas,
and not seeing what's going on with that.
I lived in Hong Kong for 15 years and traveled in Asia a lot, and minimum catch
size for both fish length, fish species, number of those
species, are all really important.
When you come back here and see the benefits of having some of those limitations on
means that you don't get the situation where people are catching what's basically a
baby fish that should nowhere near reproductive age, and
it should be a case of that should be growing up to at least
reproductive age. And not having fish
being caught to feed other fish as the primary target for what
happens with quotas that I've seen in those areas.
And besides the commercial or recreational fishing, we have to make sure we
have that healthy ecosystem. As we know, there's so many feedback
loops, whether it's sea birds, marine mammals, fish
stocks, plants in the oceans. We've heard about kin bearings, all of that.
So when we look at quotas and the processor who's in there, it's
not about a resource that... And I use the word resource.
Resource is the word that we think of as something we can just take, and
we shouldn't be thinking of that as humans.
We've got to think of the other
planet mates that we've got here, whether that's the bird, the fish,
the other fish species that are not target.
We need to take them into account when we're doing our quota and how we're fishing.
This bill, to me, appears to reward the
laggards and not the forward-thinking fishing folks that are doing really
good, really cool, sustainable, purposefully caught.
They go out with a catch list. They know where that fish is going, catching and
buying it, rather than the bulk fishing.
And we often fall into this in our primary industries in New Zealand
of
going for the bulk rather than the high quality known source that
we know food security can give us such a better return.
UmMonitoring the fishering activities, the camera
one and the limits on that, we need to have those cameras or
technology in place that not only looks above water, but what's
going on as it's coming up and on the bottom destruction.
I think we can use our technology better, and we shouldn't be limiting access to
that info, but we should be expanding the technology
available to basically what the fishing guys are using to
catch these things, what else is in there, and getting that data spread back to
help more understanding and better balancing of
people's understanding of what can be taken and what can't.
The factory processing at sea, that is just like, it should have the
same demands as if it was processed on the land in New Zealand.
And those quotas should not allow to roll over to a next year.
The minimum quota, if you don't get it, that's it.
The same as recreational fishers.
Imagine if we changed that, so every day you could roll on to what you hadn't
caught the other day for a whole year.
That's a really good point.
So, I reject the bill in its current form.
We've got to do something better about this, and as I've heard from other speakers,
this bill is kind of
putting New Zealand into a bad light rather than to a light of being a
good producer of food, which is what we're known for around the world, and we need
to protect that.
Thank you.
Do you have a question, Jo?
No, thank you. That was a really clear submission.
Thank you, and some good points raised.
Yeah. Thank you very much, Miran. That was awesome.
Thanks, team. Appreciate your time. Good luck.
Okay. Bye.
Would you like to attempt to reconnect?
Yeah.
Can
I miss out on his $100K budget?
Is Bridget even there?
Yes,
she is.
Okay.
Have you got his email address?
Or phone number, or mobile number?
Yeah, we'll send an email.
Or send an email and just say that if he gets it, we could, Jo, if you don't
mind, we could just hear him at 2:40.
Yeah.
Okay.
Fine.
Is that all right with you, Jo?
Yep.
Yeah. And before we have the break.
And that's his last chance, third time lucky.
Okay. So Bridget, we're actually over time now, aren't we?
Oh, no, we're good.
Just a little bit there.
Please.
Just need to take it off mute, Bridget.
There we go. Is that better?
I was going to say, the kids will be able to tell you how to do it, but that's
great. Well done.
Hi. So-
Leave the crabs alone. Leave the crabs alone.
I don't think I need to say much.
Leave the crabs alone.
Okay. You're great little parliamentarians, and I love that.
We're just going to let the lady talk for just a little minute, okay?
And then you can tell her your messages. Okay.
Fantastic.
Hi.
So, we've got five minutes. It goes pretty quickly. We'd love to hear from you.
So, fire away, and leave some time if you want to answer any
questions.
I don't really have a lot to say. You've already got my submission.
And Juliet.
And so we just wanted to-
Juliet
... be thinking about the next generation that we're leaving.
And I'm an EC teacher, I've got an EC center.
I've had this center for 13 years. We're very passionate about what we leave
behind for our little people. So we've been talking about what's happening
and what they think about that and what they think about should happen to the fish
and our oceans, and they have got some great ideas.
So I'm actually going to get them to share them with you. So, done.
You want to skip to...
No? Okay, go.
Show your poster, Theo.
Theo, hold it up.
Good job, buddy.
Do you want to read your one?
Leave the crabs alone.
Thanks, Billy.
Oh, Billy.
Okay. You want to read your one up?
What does yours say, Theo?
"Only take what you need."
Fantastic. Thank you, Theo.
You can take one.
Okay. Your one, your turn. Your one says, "Keep the fish
in the sea."
Yeah.
Thank you, Lachie.
Thank you, Lachie. Who's next?
Bridget.
Paige, your turn, my love. This one says, "I love fishing.
Will there be fish for me?"
Yes.
All right, who's next?
Thanks, Paige.
This one says,
"Don't change the rules."
There you go.
Excellent. Thank you very much, Harlan.
Harlan. All right, this one's you next.
You come through with yours. What does your one say, Layla? You can read yours.
Leave our fish alone.
That's a very clear message. Thank you, Layla.
And next.
Play date.
This one says, "Only take big fish." And that's
Harold.
Thank you, Harold.
And Billy, you want to read your one out?
Okay.
Leave the crabs alone.
Excellent.
Okay, done.
Thanks, Billy.
All right. There's a reluctant campaigner hereAnd this
one says, "Keep the cameras on the boats."
Keep the cameras on the boats.
And-
Brilliant
... Micah, you want to come and put these down?
You guys have been very busy.
We really have. We're learning a lot.
Fish alive.
Fish live in the water where they have to
grow.
Grow.
Brilliant.
And what does your one say, Miss Indy?
Mine says, "Leave the sea horses alive."
Sea little horses belong in the sea.
Leave the sea-
That's right. Thank you.
We got everybody? Everyone's done?
No.
Oh, not you.
All right, one more. Turn around. Hiddy-hiddy.
Hi.
Let's have a look at yours. What do you want to say?
Thanks, Ashley. Oh, "Leave our turtles alone."
There you go. So we just thought it's important our little people have a voice in
this because then it's going to have the biggest-
Hi
...
impact.
Hi. Hi.
Hey, I think it's amazing that you guys are participating in the democratic-
What is name?
That's what it's all about. So it's very exciting that you've joined us today.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
And we love your amazing pictures, too.
And it's a great way to share a message, is when you've got a graphic with it, so
well done.
And we want to know your name.
See you.
Pardon?
We want to know what your name is.
Oh, my name's Suze Redmayne. I'm the MP for Rangitikei.
And you've also got Jo Luxton, who's on the Primary Production Select Committee,
too.
Thank you. Thank you very much, ladies. Thank you for hosting us.
No, thank you.
Bye.
Thank you. Bye.
That was classic.
That was a bit of a breather. That was a bit like Rainbow Fish Jojo.
Um, I just about lost it with the crab. Are we live?
I just about lost it with the crab call.
He wouldn't want to have said that when he was 20.
You wouldn't want to hold that up at the pub when you were 20, would you?
No, it was good.
That was really cool.
Okay, so next we have...
Are we up to Nicholas?
Yes.
Yeah. We've asked him to unmute, but he hasn't responded.
So, we might try to just call him ourselves.
If you could just let him know over the mic that we're going to try and call him.
Hey, Nicholas, we're just going to try and call you, if that's okay.
Because we can't-
Oh, I think he's still-
No, he's popped off.
Oh, he's popped off. Okay. All right. We'll just try that number.
Wow.
Oh.
Has
submission just...
Uh, we can have a pinch.
We could Bryce in the room. He about to come in.
Oh, cool. Yeah, let's go.
Thanks, Bryce.
All right.
Um, his submission was four words, "I object, I object." His written
submission.
Um, yeah.
Yeah. Think as well, could be good to know Michael's got the-
Yeah.
What do you want to do now?
Oh, just come and take a seat in the middle there,
and help yourself to a glass
of water. And I think you've heard it all before, but you got five
minutes, which goes really quickly.
So the floor is yours.
Right. So, my name's Bryce Helms. I'm here today as a
lifelong angler, recreationally.
And yeah, want to express my complete opposition to this bill in its current
format. Um, this bill prioritizes the profits of a
few quota holders over the health of our oceans and the interest of over a
million recreational fishermen in this country, and women.
While I disagree with it in its entirety, in the interest of time, I'll try and
limit it to a few specific sections.
So firstly, the minimum size limits in Section
67C and 67D.
We've all seen and heard the response to this.
It's the easiest to grasp as it's the most egregious example of putting
commercial interests above those of recreational.
Minimum size limits are set to allow fish to reach maturity and breed before
being harvested.
Harvesting immature fish before they can breed is biological
sabotage and morally bankrupt when recreational fishermen have
to abide by the same size limits.
While this is a headline-grabbing clause, if it were a
removal of limit, limit, minimum size limits
combined with the requirement to land all catch with that counted
against the TAC, I would support this.
However, combined with the rest of the bill, it's not that.
It simply isn't.
Which brings me to the second part.
quota top-ups in Clause 14, Section 21.
This clause mandates that the minister can adjust the total allowable catch
upwards to account for fishing-related mortality revealed by cameras.
Camera trials showed huge increases in discards and dumping.
TACs have been set using discard data that is clearly far below the
actual figure, and the camera rollout will, by the Ministry's own admission,
result in further increase in discards being recorded.
Instead of reducing the TAC to account for this mortality or trying to reduce
waste, this clause does the exact opposite.
Even worse is the ability to incrementally increase this allowance
as the camera rollout progresses.
And thirdly, legalizing the dumping of dead usable fish
in Clause 32, Section 72A.
This section removes the requirement that fish returned to the
sea have a high likelihood of survival.
With the allowances in the previous clause meaning that these discards don't
necessarily count against their quota.
As long as they're recorded by a camera or reported,
it's green-lit. They can effectively choose whether they keep a fish or not,
undersized,
oversized, whatever. They can discard those fish without that
being allocated against their TAC because of these quota
top-ups.
Fourthly, the shielding of onboard cameras from public oversight.
The initial rollouts of these cameras have revealed huge underreporting of bycatch
and discards. Specifically, MPI's data showed in the initial
rollout,
a 950% increase in kingfish discards, a
680% increase in dolphin catches, a 210%
increase in total species discarded, and a
1,250% increase in snapper discards.
That's not accidental underreporting.
That is systematic, that is deliberate, and that is skewing the data that these
catch limits have been set using.
Despite this, it's been revealed today that the minister went directly against
official recommendations with these clauses.
Time and time again, this industry has proven that it can't be trusted to
self-regulate,
and public oversight is necessary because the Ministry has failed to
act on this underreporting. No one's been prosecuted because of it.
It's just been allowed and, in fact, rewarded with additional catch allowances to
allow for this increase in discards.
And lastly, the five-year
TAC allowances. So I strongly oppose this,
lacking annual reviews.
And furthermore, it's inserted socio-economical factors
as part of the reasoning for setting TACs rather than just
biological and ecological and biomass
standpoints.
Five-year limits would be disastrous.
The collapse of the scallop fishery is the perfect example of this.
Upon discovering two huge mother beds in the Hauraki Gulf, the
Ministry's decision was not to protect these areas, but to instead increase the
commercial quota by over 1,000%. Two years later, those beds are
decimated. The fishery's closed. They're gone.
A five-year limit would have been absolutely disastrous in this case, even worse
than the debacle that already unfolded.
So just to conclude, I don't have the financial backing to be able to wine and dine
the fisheries minister to make huge donations to his political party,
but I do have an endless amount of passion for the health of our oceans.
And it deeply saddens me to see our fisheries minister showing an open disdain
for his constituents and resorting to bravado, bluster, and personal insults when
challenged by those like myself with genuine concerns for our fisheries.
I guess that's understandable when he's never actually won a seat in Parliament.
He's never been voted anywhere, but he acts like he's
the mandate of the entire country.
This bill is an attack on the Kiwi way of life
and is only good for the profits of a select few quota holders.
I urge the committee to reject this Fisheries Amendment Bill in its entirety
and go back to the drawing board because this thing is an insane
piece of legislation that
does nothing for the health of our fisheries.
Thank you so much. Thank you for your considered submission, too.
And thank you very-- We've reached time, but we really appreciate what you had to
contribute, Bryce. Thank you very much.
No worries.
Yeah, great job.
Thanks.
So do we have Harrison Rush
or Jill Jackson?
Harrison.
Hello. Am I coming over-
You're all right
... nice and clear?
Yes, perfect.
So you've got five minutes, which goes very quickly.
So, and consider your submission read, so feel free to leave us
some time at the end for questions if you'd like to do that.
Thank you very much.
You're welcome.
Good afternoon, and thank you for the opportunity to speak.
My name is Harrison Rush, and I am a person who cares about our
environment, our communities, and the future of Aotearoa, New Zealand.
I do not support the Fisheries Amendment Bill.
Growing up in New Zealand, the ocean has always been a part of my life.
Some of my strongest memories are of the simple things: going fishing with my
family, walking along the beach, and exploring rock pools.
These experiences are not just personal, they are a part of who we are as a
nation. They connect us to our environment and to each other.
This is why I believe we cannot risk damaging or endangering our
oceans for the sake of larger commercial profits or
increased tax revenue.
We have a responsibility to ensure future generations can
have that same relationship with our marine environment that I have
had. They deserve to experience abundant sea life, not
depleted ecosystems.
I strongly oppose this bill because it risks privatizing New Zealand's
fish, a shared public
resourceI am deeply concerned
that these changes will result in fewer fish available for
everyday New Zealanders to catch and feed their families.
This bill weakens sustainability measures and
prioritizes short-term profit for a small
number of owners over the long-term health of our fisheries and the
public interests.
I am also concerned about the erosion of transparency.
Limiting public access to onboard camera footage under the
Official Information Act undermines trust and accountability
in commercial fishing practices.
There are several specific provisions I oppose.
I oppose removing the minimum size limits for commercial catches.
Fish must be allowed to breed before they are harvested.
I do not support allowing more fish to be discarded overboard
when cameras or observers are present.
It sends the wrong message and encourages waste.
I'm concerned about
extending
catch decisions to last up to five years with limited input.
That reduces oversight at the time when we need more.
I oppose lowering the standard of information required to increase catch
limits. We should be strengthening protections, not weakening them.
I also oppose removing environmental safeguards that protect
biodiversity and fish abundance.
We need more fish in the water, not fewer.
Reducing penalties for over-catching,
particularly for large deep water trawlers,
removes an important deterrent. Without strong
enforcement, rules lose their meaning.
Ultimately, I strongly oppose any changes that move control of
our fisheries further into private hands without regard for the wider
public good. In closing, I wish to make the following
recommendations. I urge that the Select Committee reject the
Fisheries Amendment bill in full.
I recommend that the fisheries management prioritizes making
fish available for local communities rather than favoring
low-value exports. We should set higher targets for stock
levels so populations are abundant, resilient, and sustainable for future
generations.
Finally, I recommend an inquiry into transitioning away from
more destructive and indiscriminatory fishing
methods towards more selective and sustainable
practices. This is an opportunity to protect
something that belongs to all of us, not just today, but for future
generations to come. Thank you very much for your time.
Thank you so much, Harrison. We've actually reached time, but thank you very much
for being part of the process. It's awesome.
Thank you.
Jill Jackson.
Are
you there?
Are we live still?
Just needs to turn her camera on. Unmute.
Kia ora tatou. Can you hear me?
We can hear you, Jill, but could you please, if you've got a camera or you want to
turn your camera on, if you can turn it on, that'd be great.
That's it. Perfect.
I've done my best.
Ka pai. Thank you. Kia ora tatou. Thank you for your
attention and the opportunity to speak on my submission, which was short
and sweet, because you're never quite sure if it's going to get through.
I'm Jill Jackson. I'm a retired teacher and a gardener, and I live with my partner,
Steve, who is beside me here.
We're not fishery experts by any means, but we do have some life experiences
to draw on to
flesh out our submission.
Steve is an offshore master, and he was a commercial fisherman in
Napier. And Steve saw a depletion of fishing stock from the
1960s onward that he describes as
exponential, and he's seen the attitude of, "If I don't take it,
someone else will," in the fishing industry.
Steve says independent public scrutiny of the cameras on boats is essential.
I had a Royal Society Primary Teachers' Fellowship, which is a
year's science sabbatical.
And I worked, at the time, in Bream Bay Aquaculture Park, which
is niwa,
and observed the development of the aquaculture industry, raising pāua, hāpuku,
and kingfish,
which enlightened me greatly as to
aquaculture.
Steve and I went fishing on Saturday, and we caught a healthy
snapper and a couple of kahawai. In our subjective
opinion, the Kaipara Harbour is in better condition than when we
came here 15 years ago, and I think it's probably due to the massive
efforts of Kaipara Moana Remediation, which is an organization
which gets farmers on board and funds and encourages
riparian and wetlands planting to prevent more silting
up of the harbor, which has been quite bad over the years,
by agricultural runoff.
So careful monitoring of the species that we catch can help us judge the
health of the ocean, which provides us with so much more than
food. The healthy ocean provides us with oxygen, acts as a
carbon sink, and is a buffer against rising temperatures.
The Kaipara Harbour has quite a number of us well-placed to oversee what's
happening in it, but not so the open seas where our fisheries
are busy.
They can't be observed by the general public, and we rely on robust
legislation, quotas that are fair and allow for fish populations to
regenerate, and cameras or observers to ensure no one's taking
unfair advantage. And if fisheries do, they're taking from everyone.
They're endangering fish stock, and present and future populations
will sufferWe must be able to trust the
enforcement of the legislation. The level of trust in the intentions of the
Minister of Fisheries is virtually nil.
He hasn't encouraged trust
in the care of the environment. There's ample
evidence of depleted breeding stocks, disruption to seamounts by trawling,
and we know it takes years to rebuild them.
On its website, the Ministry for Environment lists the numbers of endangered
marine species and notes that there's not enough known about
many of them to be able to say whether they're endangered or not.
And without this kind of information, we're playing Russian roulette with the
health of New Zealand's own unique marine biology.
And add to that, the huge pressure put on our natural environments by other human
activities, burning fossil fuels and
the raising of the temperatures. It seems common sense to just
say stop and protect and help regenerate what we have
left. We won't have anything if we keep plundering it.
We're as much a part of the picture of a healthy ocean as any shark or
mussel or mangrove or invertebrate.
Human brains are thought to have developed in size because of a seafood diet
during our evolution. I suggest we use those brains to understand we
can't take more than the system can provide.
I don't believe we can afford to relax any of the existing regulations.
I recommend the panel reject the Fisheries Amendment Bill in its entirety.
Thank you very much, Jill and Steve.
Look, we've reached time, but as a farmer, I'm grateful for
you thanking the farmers for their riparian planting and the
contribution that made to the health of the Kaipara Harbour, so good on you.
Thank you.
Thanks for your time.
Oh, thank you very much.
All right.
Yeah.
Back up to Auckland now.
Oh, well, good on you for coming down. It's a real mission, but thank you.
That's awesome.
Worth the effort for this, so.
Pardon?
Worth the effort for this.
Yeah, no, it's awesome. Thank you.
Cheers.
See you.
Right.
Oh, Linda.
Kia ora. Kia ora.
Oh, kia ora. We can hear you.
Thank you for this opportunity. I'm another person who opposes
the bill in its entirety. Despite the quota management
system, our fisheries are depleted, penguins are dying
of starvation, and it's harder for families to catch a feed.
Fisheries New Zealand has recorded a decline in catch
over the last two decades, with total catch well below the
TAC.
Instead of providing for more liberal catch rates and deemed
values, the government should be examining the reasons for the
significant decline and producing credible measures to reverse it.
But it's obvious that the TAC has been too high for too long,
and assessment of most fish stocks has not been reviewed for decades.
This lack of up-to-date data suggests there is no or inadequate
management in the quota management system.
Fish is expensive to buy. There is an insatiable world demand for
it that cannot be reasonably met. I've lived in communities
with significant deprivation that are mostly Māori
and mostly poor.
The current fuel crisis is exacerbating the well-being of such
people. Some have an old tinny or they go surf
casting. This is the only way whānau can acquire
fish. But there are stories we hear that it is more difficult to
catch a feed for the family. Trawlers have been witnessed coming close
inshore in the Eastern Bay of Plenty.
A while ago, I went to a public meeting at a local marae about Ngāti
Awa's application for a mataitai around Motuhora.
The area involved was pathetically small, but it was vigorously
opposed by commercial fishers. We haven't heard anything more
about it.
This is the power of the commercial fishing industry, and I suggest to you
that the proposals in this bill have been driven by commercial interests and
any benefits arising will accrue to those interests
only at the expense of non-commercial fishers and the
environment.
Other examples show the difficulty of achieving better fisheries management
and protection of the marine environment.
The Tarakihi case, which I'm sure you're familiar with.
The Motiti Maunga Rohe Trust here in the Bay of Plenty went to
court to have some islands free from fishing.
They succeeded, but it took 10 years and RMA amendments have been
introduced to make this less likely in the future.
As a result of these examples and others, this minister is trying to stop
the public from being a watchdog through removing opportunities for
consultation and reducing time frames for lodging judicial review
proceedings. The proposed ban on camera records being
released under the OIA is an outright attack on that
foundational act, which already protects the privacy of
individuals, and the proposed fines are outrageous.
As most of the footage is not reviewed by officials, this move will
encourage fishers to bend the rules as the risk of being found out
is low. It is a move simply to protect the industry that
Minister Jones is today reported as saying.
The bill reduces and in some cases removes checks and balances on
decision-making and enforcement.
Although fishing quota has status as property, our coastal
waters and the high seas are a public domain and the environment in these
areas is highly valued by all. It is our commons.
This bill separates the TAC process from sustainability measures
and politicizes this setting process by including social,
cultural, and economic factors, allowing for inflating the
TAC rather than ensuring it's sustainable.Low
information should be a red card to reduce fishing pressure.
Multi-year stock setting seems to
be a stab in the dark and hope it all turns out, with no clear
criteria or monitoring.
There needs to be a more cautious approach to TAC setting, given
increasing temperatures of seawater and actual potential effects on
climate change on fish stocks. In conclusion, the
Fisheries Act does need amendment for better
sustainability, better information on which to base
harvesting, the banning of bottom trawling, and promotion of
marine reserves.
So, the bill is the opposite of what is needed and should be
withdrawn. Thank you.
Thank you very much for your time and for your submission, Linda.
We really appreciate it.
Thank you.
Emily McDonald.
Oh.
Hi.
Oh, hi, Emily.
Hello. Kia ora.
Oh, fantastic. We can see you.
Can you see me? Yeah. Kia ora.
Yes, cool.
Emily McDonald aho.
And I've got this. Do you see the painting
here? No, not really.
Yes, we can see something.
Something. That's James K. Baxter,
or Christ holding the dying albatross.
Yes.
It's a painting by Nigel Brown. It's called
"Ancient Mariner Lost the Albatross,"
and
it's about us losing our way and the
mariner going out to whoever will listen to tell them
before it's too late, that we have to save the natural world, and the albatross
is
signified by the natural world.
Right.
And, so I thought this was so important.
He says around the painting, "Lost the albatross that
made us strong."
So,
this is in a spiritual sense and in a literal sense,
we've got hundreds, possibly
millions of albatross who've been killed by
fishing,
commercial fishing. And
I reject the
Fishing Amendment Bill in its entirety because I think this will
only make their plight so much worse.
This is a species which is just about
extinct, and
it is just a crisis. The 21st century crisis
is the death of the natural
world. So, it's up to us now to do something about it
before it's too late.
And I think Nigel Brown was so good in having a whole exhibition
devoted to that.
So, the Ancient Mariner said, "I pass like night from land to
land. I have strange power of speech.
The moment that his face I see I know the person that must
hear me. To them my tale I teach."
The tale that
the world is dying.
And
I recommend that the
sea become ngā moana, that
it needs personhood because that's possibly the only way that
the government will stop exploiting it and
seeing it only as a means of making money
and swallowing up the ecosystems and leaving dust and
debris in its wake.
I support implementing a zero bycatch target,
and
because Aotearoa is the seabird capital of
the world, it's just important that
all the sort of long line
and bottom trawling is banned.
I also think
that...
What else did I say?
Yeah, that the iwi of Aotearoa believe in the
kaupapa of kaitiakitanga, and we believe in
manaakitanga and mana motuhake, and yet
the government does not believe in the mana of our moana.
And I've seen for myself starving seagulls just in Central
Auckland, Tāmaki Makaurau.
The Hauraki Gulf,
the moana there has been stripped
and they've got no kai, no food.
They're starving. So
that is unacceptable.
Totally unacceptable for seagulls, which are our native
birds, to be starving.
Thank you very much for your very considered contribution.
With the rhyme of the Ancient Mariner, I thought you were talking about Samuel
Taylor Coleridge. It was taking me back to sort of fifth form English lessons.
That's right. It is Coleridge. Yeah.
But fantastic. Thank you very much.
Okay. Kia ora koutou katoa.
Yeah.
Ka
kite.Okay,
Kiri
Mane, is it?
Mane.
Not here?
Yep, they have joined.
Kiri. Kia ora.
Kia ora. Kia ora.
Right. You've got five minutes, which goes pretty quickly, so if you want to leave
some time for questions, that would be great, but the floor is yours.
Okay. Thank you for giving me-
Ka pai
... the opportunity
to share my
thoughts.
Tēnā koutou katoa. My name is Kiri Mane.
I come before you today
not just as a
75-year-old New
Zealander, but as a mother, as a nana, and
someone who has a deep concern for my mokopuna
and the generations who will come after me.
I care. I care about our moana. I
care about our oceans. I care about our
fish.
And I care about whether my mokopuna and
their mokopuna will still be able to stand on
our beaches, on our whenua, and gather
kai the way our tupuna taught us.
I absolutely oppose the Fisheries Amendment Bill.
I feel it will not only harm our ocean, it will
impact on the way we have traditionally
survived.
I worry for my children, my mokopuna,
and the world they will grow up in.
Right now, whānau across Aotearoa are already
under pressure.
The cost of living is so high,
food is expensive, and the economic pressures of
today are breaking families apart.
I worry that the decisions that you make will favor
business interests over our people's rights
when transparency is reduced and
protections weakened.
The ocean for my whānau is more than just
water.
It's our pantry. It's our life. It's our
whānau. It's a tradition.
It is survival.
It is whakapapa.
Our children and our mokopuna deserve to inherit
healthy, sustainable oceans full of life
and not what's left after the five-year
timeframe set by the fisheries'
decision-makers.
These are not minor adjustments.
They are shifts in power.
And from where I stand, they risk shifting
power away from the public and future generations
and closer to those who profit most in
the short term.
I ask this committee,
what will be left for our mokopuna if we
continue to walk down this path?
Because this is not only about economics, it is
about stewardship.
It is about ensuring our fisheries remain
abundant, resilient, and accessible.
It is about protecting breeding populations so that our
children inherit oceans
full of life, not empty waters and broken
promises.
I'm not here to say commercial fishing has no place.
I'm here to say it must never come at the cost
of people, our people, our environment,
and our future generations.
So today, I ask the select committee to
reject this bill in its current form, protect
public oversight and transparency,
strengthen, not weaken, sustainability
protections, prioritize abundant fish
populations for local food security and
future resilience, and urgently
investigate how New Zealand can move towards
more selective, environmentally responsible
fishing practices.
Because this is bigger than policy.
This is about our legacy.
This is about whether our future generations will
inherit a living ocean or
simple memories of what we failed to protect.
I stand here today for my mokopuna, for your
mokopuna,
for all those who cannot stand here yet, but who
will live with the consequences of what we choose
now. I am a nana who cares,
and I ask you to show that you care as well.
Ngā mihi nui.
Ngā mihi, Kiri. That was a very powerful submission.
I love the way you described the ocean as your pantry, your life, your
whānau, your traditions, survival, and your
whakapapa. I think that was amazing. Thank you very much. It was really good.
Okay. Thank you.
Ma te wa.
Can you try the timer again, Mike?
Yeah. We seem to work, mate.
Yeah.
We're trying to find a friend again.
I shouldn't have said that it's live. I'm not very good with the live stream.
Hey, Joe.
Oh,
I'm
flashing.
Hopefully.
We've
also attempted to email.
I think we've given it a few, Craig.
Okay.
Right. So we have a break now until 3:00.
Is that right?
Ka pai.
We're still